Title: First jobs suck
Date: 2008-08-28

While in High School, I took a part time job at the local AMC. In retrospect,
I should have left after the first day, which they seemed to have timed with
the release of Star Wars: Episode I. The lines were massive and paperwork was
set aside to have their ten new hires push popcorn. This sort of emergency
mode was constant and I now recognize it as a red flag of terrible jobs.

AMC is located in Kansas City, so it makes the local news when AMC
is fined for [violating child labor law.][1] I'm not very surprised they got
hit; the theaters are mainly operated by kids and overseen by community
college students. The papers are citing trash compactors and late hours; I
know both such things happened during my tenure. It's a bit of a surprise to
me that compactors are age restricted -- it's almost impossible to get injured
with the one I used. Late hours for 14 and 15 year olds was more a problem of
enforcement than deliberate evil; management assumed they'd actually leave
when scheduled to, which didn't always happen. I recall two instances of
managers visibly frustrated when one of them forgot to clock out; but clearly
not frustrated enough to stop hiring them. I'm not sure what their solution
will be; fire any such person who doesn't clock out and leave in time?

The real WTFs though aren't published in the papers. Federal law exempts
[movie theaters][2] from overtime, have no break required (but few do).
Honestly, while it was a surprise to discover, overtime was never a big
problem (Kansas law places overtime at 46 hours and has no theater provision).
But the no dinner part always was. Working 8 or 9 hours on your feet without
food was full of suck, and probably motivated a lot of consession stand theft.
I find it a bit unfortunate that AMC has paid a fine rather than significantly
improve their workplace.

   [1]: http://www.kansascity.com/382/story/769717.html

   [2]: http://www.dol.gov/compliance/guide/minwage.htm#who

