Title: New job
Date: 2008-11-13

Today I started a new job as a "Systems Analyst" for a local community
college. There's a lot of silly practices going on there, but I think I can
fix at least a few of them before my time is up. Personal target number one is
probably going to be the stupid email confidentiality clause plastered to
every staff email. Target number two is to fix the character stripping done on
input to the issue tracker. A third might be to do something about Firefox 3
and SSL certs on campus. And I'm sure the people who hired me have some things
for me to do as well ^_^

The systems my group seems to be tasked with are educational and IT support.
Computer labs, Blackboard/WebCT, Renderman, and servers for student web
classes. There's a healthy mix of Linux, Windows and OSX on desktop, and Linux
and Windows on servers. And a brickton of VMware. There are a number of
transitions happening soon, so I expect a trial by fire during the learning
phase (apparently one happened today before I arrived and another a few hours
later). They're moving student email from locally hosted to GMail for
Institutions, rolling out IE7 (I think they're hoping Vista dies), and
switching to ANGEL LMS.

The pay is twice what I was making before (but maybe half of what I'm worth),
with lots of gadgets and no overtime or on-call duties. Oh, and a pager (only
for when I'm on the job I'm told). I mostly spent today touring the facilities
and setting up the vast array of equipment bequeathed to me: a dual monitor
PC, an iMac, an iPaq, wireless Plantronics headset, and a lot of random
surplus equipment. The college seems to be great at buying equipment at least.
And the whole building is impressive, if a bit impractical in my experience
(huge windows and glass everywhere seems good on paper but leads to heating,
cooling and projector problems).

I'm also allowed a free class every semester but my level of education
basically exceeds 95 percent of what a community college offers students.
Still, it might be nice to take a hands on technology course on networking to
complement my studies on networking and proofs of protocol correctness.

