Title: Garmin hosts a Linux User Group meeting
Date: 2009-05-10

[Garmin][1] is a sizable consumer electronics firm situated in the Kansas City
metro area, and yesterday they graciously hosted a [KULUA meeting][2] in their
conference space. Why would they do this? Because they use [Linux in their
products][3] and are hiring.

[Tallgrass Technologies][4] catered lunch, gave a presentation on OpenStorage
and held a buisness card raffle for Royals' tickets. A few local Linux
aficionado's gave quick presentations on postgresql and [Mylyn][5]. It has
been suggested that at some point slides and videos of these will be posted.
Garmin also gave a talk ([slides][6]), but there wasn't any invitation for
questions, so those of you hoping to hear about upstream involvement or more
transparency will be disappointed. Still, I'm glad they chose to distribute
the slides and talk at all. Oh, one neat trick the presenter showed off was
ssh'ing into a nuvi device. It's rare to find embedded platforms that leave
dropbear installed, so thats pretty sweet. Not sure what ant was running for
though; surely they don't build on the device itself.

The campus itself is much, _much_ bigger than when I was last invited to
visit. The parking garage appears to have been custom engineered to move
Garmin products, as the place is an unnavigable labyrinth. The lobby
atmosphere was laden with an awkward senior year interview type tension: five
well dressed complete strangers sit in uncomfortable silence, perhaps even
secretly sizing one another up, and wait for a company employee to escort you
to the interview room user group meeting. I feel like I got the evil eye a
bit, dressed in my Ubuntu polo and jeans. Probably because Garmin is hiring,
and won't let you forget this fact. In fact, they're one of the few places in
town that _is_ hiring, even though they just [announced][7] major [profit
drops][8] in the last week.

Certainly, there was a large turnout, and it highlights demand for user group
meetings in Johnson County and Kansas City. If there are any Ubuntistas in the
area, you may want to get in contact with me.

   [1]: http://www.garmin.com

   [2]: http://www.kulua.org/

   [3]: http://developer.garmin.com/linux

   [4]: http://www.tallgrasstech.com/

   [5]: www.eclipse.org/mylyn/

   [6]: http://groups.google.com/group/kulua-l/msg/6e1b4263a200151b

   [7]: http://seekingalpha.com/article/135883-garmin-ltd-q1-2009-earnings-call-transcript?source=yahoo

   [8]: http://finance.yahoo.com/news/Garmin-posts-steep-decline-in-apf-15156602.html?.v=10

