Title: George Carlin's rolling in his grave
Date: 2008-07-24

Wikipedia offers [the following definition][1] of etiquette (emphasis mine):

> Etiquette, one aspect of decorum, is a code that governs the expectations of
social behavior, according to the **contemporary conventional norm** within a
society, social class, or group. Usually unwritten, it may be codified in
written form.

[The Ubuntu Code of Conduct][2] is our etiquette, codified in written form; it
is also universal. It covers:

> "behaviour as a member of the Ubuntu Community, in any forum, mailing list,
wiki, web site, IRC channel, install-fest, public meeting or private
correspondence"

Written in the affirmative, it offers several adjectives relevant to how
Ubuntu development should be done. This universality means making rules and
interpretations for Planet Ubuntu based on the CoC might reasonably apply
elsewhere. Jono Bacon, member of the Ubuntu Community Council and Canonical's
appointed Ubuntu Community Manager once stated he felt excited to work at a
place where he didn't have to turn off who he was during work hours or
separate what he liked from what he did, and we may [shortly discover how Jono
feels about diminishing that][3]. Despite the clear wording of universality,
Fabián Rodríguez has [suggested][4] that the Planet needs more formalized
rules than the ones inherited from Debian (English only and "don't be
annoying") and the CoC. His position appears to be that including
objectionable [words and phrases][5], and objectionable ideas are not
respectful, and therefore [violate the CoC][6]. **I respectfully disagree.**

Fabián Rodríguez [writes][4]:

> I don’t expect anyone to change their “WTF” and “STFU” attitude, just leave
it outside this project. Setting up a category to carry only Planet Ubuntu
posts may help.

And clarifies in [a comment][7]:

> Although I am brining up the CoC because we have one, I think it is such
common sense I am a bit surprised I even got comments on IRC asking what is
wrong with WTF’ing here and there or A**holing now and then. Nothing really.
But take it elsewhere. And I’ll gladly meet you there, but it won’t be under
my @ubuntu.com hat.

It should be obvious that sending harassing, demeaning or confrontational
email to Ubuntu or Debian or any other developers isn't suddenly okay if you
didn't use @ubuntu.com as the From address. Similarly, it shouldn't matter
whether you tag a post with "ubuntu"; if you act or write from a position
within the community, and the audience associates you with Ubuntu, you should
follow the guidelines as an ambassador of Ubuntu to the larger Linux
community, or at least make a note that you are not acting or writing as a
member of the Ubuntu community in cases where it might not be clear. At any
rate, **if you are an Ubuntu Member, then, you should be worried when someone
tries to redefine the Conduct you agreed to follow.**

The logical conclusion of Fabián's position is that to be respectful nothing
that sets off anyone's triggers may pass through Planet Ubuntu's gates. This
is a dangerous place to be: one can think of dozens actions that might be
considered offensive to some. As Jordan Mantha eloquently [put it][8]:

> trying to legislate morality is both undesirable and incredibly difficult
for the Community Council to do. They are trying to represent a community made
up of people from nations and cultures all over the world, and it’s
essentially impossible to satisfy both the moral sensibilities and personal
liberties of everybody at the same time. I’m also fairly sure it is neither
their right nor their charter to tell people what is and is not offensive.

There exist a number of social, religious and political taboos that various
cultures may find offensive. It feels weird being an American (land of
assimilation) calling a Canadian (home of multiculturalism) on this. If
Ubuntu, "Linux for human beings," demands that writing obey one viewpoint, it
potentially offends another one as censorship. For example, most of us may see
a [Tibetan][9] language translation of Ubuntu as progress in bringing Free
Software to people who need it, but to a few the act may [suggest][10] an
anti-China political statement, akin to adding a Confederate flag to the
distribution. The Code of Conduct is fortunate to say nothing about such dry
powderkegs. As long as we can hold beliefs, disagree and still obey they Code
of Conduct's demands for consideration, respect, collaboration, and
consultation, there should be room in Ubuntu for all of us.

### Chilling effects

Attitude is one thing; I think RTFM or STFU are rarely productive statements.
But what's appeared goes far beyond that. Fabián prefers that people who don't
agree with his flexible interpretation of "respect" go away. I know at least
one guy who does. He still contributes to the development of Ubuntu, but what
he has to say is less often heard because despite his [reputation][11], he's
quite willing to implicitly comply with the infantilization of the Planet and
rarely tags posts our way. It's fortunate that it's easy to include individual
RSS feeds in Liferea directly, but if I don't know there's an amount of self
censorship going on first, I simply lose that insight, no matter how germane
it is to Ubuntu, Free Software or the communities that surround them.

But even if we were to agree that some topics are a bridge too far, specific
words and phrases found offensive by some have no clear relation with respect,
and already are within **contemporary conventional norms** when used in
moderation. In fact, [this][12] entire enlightened discussion would have come
across as condescending rather than conversational if the language were to be
sanitized; by using that language the author communicates that the audience is
a peer, which is _central_ to the point. **Self-censored writing feels
inauthentic**. In that thread, the author comments:

> I haven't been particularly active in the Ubuntu community (my first
introduction to the open source world), largely because everyone is so damned
polite all the time, and as a result the discussions seem fairly dry and
limited to technical topics.

This is a disappointing failure to integrate, especially since Rhythmbox
[needs a lot][13] of lovin', and I'd be happy to see Ubuntu play a
foundational role in making that happen.

### Doing something constructive about it

One thing that can be done is to **offer editorial advice** ahead of
publication. I've often wished to have a few trustworthy people preview my
work on this blog and offer suggestions the way [kuro5hin][14] does before
going public with a writing. It's a bit sad that the advent of blogging
software led to the downfall of community driven writing like k5. Stephan's [
writing][15] comes across as a bit... "stream of thought," and perhaps a round
of editorial review can create something more effective at communicating his
ideas and getting people to agree with him. I suspect such offers will be
treated as censorship, though a good editor offers only advice, not orders.

Since people are seeking, among other remedies, the removal of Stephan's blog
from the Planet, I thought I'd do them a favor. As far as I can tell, the
current Planet software doesn't implement filtering (the Venus branch might,
but will it support queries?), but the entire Planet software is easy to
duplicate, and it's output is easy to manipulate. Here's what the Planet looks
like without [Stephan Hermann][16]. And for comparison, without [Fabián's
blog.][17] You can find the construction of this relatively simple
construction [here][18]. If that doesn't float your boat, I've also
constructed a simple [dirty words filter][19]. Feel free to customize, the
defaults come from [the expert on the subject.][20] I've also considered
running an alternative, unofficial planet similar to [Dave Airlied's][21], but
I'm not sure it's possible without coming across as arrogant or causing hurt
feelings.

Finally, the Community Council has this topic on their agenda, and if it
doesn't get tabled for lack of time, will be heard at the next meeting. If you
can't attend, there are logs available for all such meetings on
[irclogs.ubuntu.com.][22] In the spirit of being collaborative, it seems
relevant to invite [Emma Hogbin][23]'s opinion, as it seems the language of
[her lecture][24] that [started][25] the [mess][15] Fabián and Stephan find
themselves in now. As an invited speaker to the now canceled Ubuntu Live!
event, decisions rendered would clearly affect her future participation with
the Ubuntu community.

If you take one thing away from this essay let it be this: **Booting members
from the project is in no way, shape, or form "collaborative"**, and should be
taken only when all reasonable measures have failed.

   [1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etiquette

   [2]: http://www.ubuntu.com/community/conduct

   [3]: https://wiki.ubuntu.com/CommunityCouncilAgenda/

   [4]: http://www.fabianrodriguez.com/blog/archives/2008/07/21/have-you-noticed-a-friendly-reminder/

   [5]: http://www.sourcecode.de/content/linux-haters-blog-windows-lover-blogs-wtf

   [6]: https://wiki.ubuntu.com/CommunityCouncilAgenda/talk

   [7]: http://www.fabianrodriguez.com/blog/archives/2008/07/21/have-you-noticed-a-friendly-reminder/#comment-91264

   [8]: http://laserjock.wordpress.com/2008/07/23/repurposing-planet/

   [9]: https://launchpad.net/~ubuntu-l10n-bo

   [10]: http://www.newleftreview.org/?page=article&view=2720 (One of the biggest grievances is that the Chinese authorities equate any expression of Tibetan identity with separatism.)

   [11]: http://www.angryfacts.com/facts.cgi?f=9

   [12]: http://undamped.blogspot.com/2008/07/be-dick-if-thats-what-you-are.html

   [13]: https://bugs.edge.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/rhythmbox (My God, it's full of segfaults!)

   [14]: http://kuro5hin.org

   [15]: http://www.sourcecode.de/content/you-will-never-fix-bug-01

   [16]: http://pipes.yahoo.com/pipes/pipe.run?_id=ekaR_FtY3RGsNNRdCB2yXQ&_render=rss&textinput1=Fabi%C3%A1n+Rodr%C3%ADguez

   [17]: http://pipes.yahoo.com/pipes/pipe.run?_id=ekaR_FtY3RGsNNRdCB2yXQ&_render=rss&textinput1=Stephan+Hermann

   [18]: http://pipes.yahoo.com/jldugger/ubuntuplanetfilter

   [19]: http://pipes.yahoo.com/jldugger/ubuntuminusobsenity

   [20]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_dirty_words

   [21]: http://planet.kernel.org/fedora

   [22]: http://irclogs.ubuntu.com

   [23]: http://emmajane.net/

   [24]: http://www.archive.org/details/women_in_open_source

   [25]: http://mjg59.livejournal.com/94420.html

