Title: Goal Setting
Date: 2009-04-20

Ubuntu 9.04 will mark the [tenth release][1] of Ubuntu. Rather than party and
engage in self congratulation, I'd like to engage in a retrospective.

## The rocky trail traveled

In November I helped facilitate a collaboration between a [Fedora Board
member][2] and the organizers of Ubuntu Brainstorm, to test some social
network datamining. I'm assuming the conclusion was that the votes were too
sparse to draw any strong conclusions about niches interested in specific
subjects. Certainly, there's an element of privacy that restricts what can be
done here even if it is viable.

[I joined MetaFilter][3] and started following the [ubuntu][4] and [linux][5]
tags on AskMeFi. So far, I've racked up four or five "best answers". It's a
very similar project to [Answers][6], except there's a five dollar sign up fee
that appears to boost the coherence of the questions and replies. And it has
RSS feeds, which is nice for turning down the rate of flow out of the
firehose.

In January, I tried to get ubuntu CDs in the local college library. They
refused a free donation, citing a budget crunch. They also feared a slippery
slope where once they started accepting some software, they'd have to start
buying other programs for circulation. Amusingly, the library already carries
Ubuntu books, and provides the CDs they come with. I believe the reason it was
refused was political rather than fiscal: officially accepting software means
budgeting for software, which would likely slant the budget in favor of the
technology librarians over other subject areas.

Where I specifically fell down over the past six months was in testing and
fixing Jaunty. Traditionally, I use my TabletPC to test tools in ubuntu+1 that
support the TabletPC hardware. Fingerprint readers, wacom, handwriting, and so
on. Unfortunately, I had to loan that device out to a family member who's
computer has gone out of commission. Add on top of that a new job with far
less spare time, as a system administrator, and triaging and testing fell
behind.

## Blazing a new way forward

I don't feel like I've accomplished much in the past cycle. To better motivate
myself, I'm going to publicly commit to making some changes. For the future,
it's time to right-size my goals. I'll do some new stuff, and drop some of
old.

### For sure:

  * **Promote Ubuntu**. I've volunteered to present the Ubuntu netbook remix
at an upcoming LUG meeting. Hopefully I'll have enough CDs and stickers to go
around.

  * **Evaluate desktop backup tools.** We have a lot of backup tools in
Ubuntu. Newly minted Ubuntu Member mterry even wrote and packaged one. We
always tell people to make backups before upgrading, but there isn't a lot of
attention paid to it by the community. I'm taking notes on 8 backup tools thus
far. Since I've got a desktop that's been running Ubuntu, and upgraded from
warty through the ages to jaunty, keeping around the accumulated changes
interests me.

  * **Share-alike.** I'll revisit the library's policy on software and try the
public libraries instead if they still can't accept free software.

### Maybe:

  * **Address bug #290159**. There's a patch, I forwarded it upstream for
review, and it sorta stalled out. Unfortunately, the upstream author is also
the Debian maintainer, so there's no extra opportunity for collaboration and
peer review there.

  * **Test and triage wacom.** Without 24/7 access to hardware, triaging
reports is hard and testing is even harder. If I get it back, I'll be in a
better place to dedicate some time to handle it.

  * **Pitch in for the Ubuntu education project**. I have experience with
popular existing web courseware tools, but not Moodle. Helping out with that
may be interesting. I'm not sure where exactly this is being organized though.

  * **Package KeePass 2.0** In a [previous post][7] I asked about software for
managing team secrets. [Keepass 2.0][8] fills a niche we need at work, so it'd
be nice to have it available on Ubuntu workstations. Upstream is dicey though;
a single developer who doesn't publish a public source repo, just binaries
with corresponding source. Hopefully he'll publish a new version that fixes
one or two bugs we've encountered and reported in testing.

### Step Down Considerately:

  * **Fingerprinting in Ubuntu.** This is a bad idea who's time has come.
Unfortunately, there's too much bad to unwind. Thinkfinger in Ubuntu is an SVN
snapshot of a dead project, who's packaging I don't fully understand. fprint
is potentially the replacement but I haven't had time to read how PAM changed
since Hardy. But basically, now that I know that it can work, I'm not sure it
_should_.

   [1]: http://daniel.holba.ch/blog/?p=391

   [2]: http://jspaleta.livejournal.com/

   [3]: http://www.metafilter.com/user/82435

   [4]: http://ask.metafilter.com/tags/ubuntu/rss

   [5]: http://ask.metafilter.com/tags/linux/rss

   [6]: http://answers.launchpad.net/ubuntu

   [7]: http://jldugger.livejournal.com/26434.html

   [8]: http://keepass.info/

