Title: Is Gentoo dying?
Date: 2008-09-28

A recent cnet article suggests that [Ubuntu is eating other distribution's
lunch][1]. In particular, one distribution is reported to be falling apart:
[Gentoo][2]. Gentoo was very popular among my friends at the time I adopted
Linux, but from what I've seen, the project fell apart as developers were
unable to come to consensus or resolve conflicts.

From what little I know of Gentoo users and the project, it's closer to say
that Gentoo is becoming an unofficial set of distributed overlays than a
centralized approved project with trusted developers and so on. Gentoo's core
appeal isn't under attack by Ubuntu -- building from source and customization
for performance are central and remain relatively unique. If Ubuntu's focus on
desktop usability or six month release cycle are appealing enough to Gentoo
users that they leave the project, then build from source and customization
were simply means to an end and Ubuntu has improved the Linux landscape for
the better.

The article cites Google Trends as evidence of Ubuntu rocketing off to outer
space while Gentoo stagnates. I'm reminded of the current 5-a-day discussion;
there's a certain amount of danger to blindly trusting metrics. This Google
Trend shows ["Ubuntu" approaching "Dell":][3]

![][4]

>(Orange = Dell; Red = Ubuntu; Blue = Gentoo) <p>

It's a large leap to say that Ubuntu is as popular as Dell; certainly Ubuntu
is a small fraction of Dell sales. One thing I do know is that Ubuntu is very
googleable. All the [mailing lists][5] are archived, [IRC][6] is publicly
logged, the forums even have a special search engine mode for faster indexing
and engine retrieval, [bug pages aren't blocked in robots.txt][7], and the
wiki is used extensively. This wide array of information is something a tool
like Google Search can aid in, and is far simpler than say searching the wiki
individually, then Launchpad and so on. Perhaps Ubuntu users are heavier users
of Google Search, compensating for what could be a smaller user base. We can't
really infer user base size from Trends, just growth patterns.

What does seem clear from the trend is that interest in Ubuntu isn't growing
as quickly today. Every new release causes a bump in search volume but there
isn't as much sticking around after the release. Maybe Ubuntu works better
today, so people aren't Googling their problems as often? I am, shall we say,
open to alternative explanations.

   [1]: http://news.cnet.com/8301-13505_3-10047439-16.html?tag=mncol;title

   [2]: http://www.gentoo.org

   [3]: http://www.google.com/trends?q=gentoo%2C+ubuntu%2C+dell&ctab=0&geo=all&date=all&sort=0

   [4]: http://www.google.com/trends/viz?q=gentoo,+ubuntu,+dell&date=all&geo=all&graph=weekly_img&sort=0

   [5]: http://lists.ubuntu.com

   [6]: http://irclogs.ubuntu.com

   [7]: http://bugs.debian.org/robots.txt

