Title: Coders at Work book review
Date: 2010-03-28

I finished up [Coders at Work][1] today, having received it from the
[local library][3] only recently (I need to figure out what magical data
source people use to put these books on reserve so early!)

_Coders At Work_ is a series of interviews with programmers, people with
successful backgrounds and some name recognition (to the extent people
recognize programmers). Each interview is roughly 40 pages, and attempts to
ask a standard set of questions in an attempt to document diversity and/or
consensus. Most of the coders interviewed are older, both for the obvious
reason that publicly acknowledgement of success and experience take time, and
to cater to a celebrity history market.

The only guy who's close to my age is Brad Fitzpatrick, who shares a bit of
culture with me; writing TI Basic games on long road trips and losing them due
to battery failure. His stories of rolling in advertising banner ad money is
one I've heard before. Probably the most interesting part of his entrepreneurship is
how open source allows him to sell a website/company and then build new sites
using the GPL'd assets he wrote when building the site up. Judging by his
anecdote about selling FreeVote on the cheap just to be done with it, I wonder
if something similar happened with LiveJournal.

The author has a bit of an obsession with Knuth and his volume of books, _The
Art Of Computer Programming_. As best I can tell, Knuth doesn't invent
anything but instead compiles published research into the above book. Since we
keep graduating new PhDs but still have just the one Knuth, the series is
unfinished and _unfinishable_. Annoyingly, many algorithms are named after him
that he merely popularized, rather than invented. I suppose it's a worthy task
to cut the jargon out of conference papers, as they can be really quite
excruciating. The author's overweighting of Knuth comes in the form of asking
every interviewee whether they've read Knuth's books and done any [literate
programming][4], leading up to a finale interview with Knuth himself.

Despite the author's inclinations, there are some good interviews in there.
The Erlang author is interviewed, and after reading it I think I need to
invest some time with Erlang. It's too bad I'm currently experimenting with
Python/Django. It might be neat to do something web based with Erlang, but I'm
wary of anything that decides it's easier to write a new httpd than implement
an Apache module.

Some observations about the group interviewed: lots of compiler and language
people, many had early access to research university computers, or later in
computing history, programming jobs out of high school. (I don't even know how
you find that kind of work as a kid). Most of the people I recognized are
mainly famous for their non-coding activities; I'd wager more people have
looked at TAOCP than have used TeX. Overall, I'd say these "coders" slant
academic.

_Coders at Work_ is a pretty good read. You can easily read just the
interviews that interest you and not miss anything for it. If you work in the
field, consider picking it up it; makes for good night reading material.

   [1]: http://amzn.to/2ejUe9r

   [3]: http://www.jocolibrary.org/

   [4]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming

