Title: Why single out Apple?
Date: 2008-09-14

Apple has recently gotten some heat for [refusing to approve a competing
iPhone app][1]. From a business perspective, the only thing wrong is Apple
admitting this instead of finding a scapegoat excuse. It's a bit sad when
gatekeepers using their status to bludgeon a select few competitors is a step
forward from the status quo.

We've known that the iPhone is a walled garden for some time; hell, when Apple
announced the App store it was hailed as revolutionary, no longer did users
have to jailbreak their phones to fight the cell phone provider cartel (just
sign up for a two year agreement of epic proportions). Jailbreaks are a great
way to **earn notoriety and a feeling of superiority, having somehow cheated
the system**. I used to succumb to the seduction of cheating the system via
technology; long before the advent of iPods and iPhones, a classmate of mine
owned a [Diamond Rio][2] and I was quite jealous. I certainly had a CD burner
back in the days when Word Autosave could turn a CD-R into a coaster through
dreaded buffer underflows.

But over time I've come to realize that having to jailbreak something in the
first place is the source of that envy, and it's only enviable because open
access socially beneficial. Locked platforms increase the cost to entry,
excluding programmers because they don't have cash to spare or an address
outside of a dorm room. I wonder how the Steve Jobs that sold [blue boxes][3]
feels about the Steve Jobs that locks out competition. He'd probably ask the
Steve Jobs that wrote an [open letter][4] to explain to us why the [big
cartels][5] won't let them play that way.

So what's the status quo on mobile phones? If you want to know what the PC
world might look like post Microsoft, mobile is the place to look. It's a
massively splintered market with trails of middlemen between application
developers and their customers The big platforms are:

  * **J2ME (Java)**: The broadest implemented [platform][6], and also the most
constrained. Network access is restricted to HTTP only and the "improved" 2.0
API provides only tone and wav audio. Phones in the US usually refuse to run
applets not signed by the carrier, but you can at least test on your PC's JVM.

  * **Symbian**: a popular firmware OS among high end Nokia phones, but is
introducing capabilities via digital signatures to clamp down on Bluetooth
virus effects.

  * **BREW**: popular on Qualcomm hardware, is reportedly worse off than
Symbian, where your ability to deliver software to end users at all must be
blessed by a "content provider," typically a mobile carrier, and you still
need a 400 dollar license to digitally sign personal builds for testing.

So the only thing that Apple has done is wrest away the stranglehold carriers
have on application consumers. Traditionally the best way to reach your
customers is through the carriers, on their websites, mailings and app stores.
Apple has taken this away from AT&T, but certainly isn't about to surrender it
to 3rd party developers. They've taken high margins away from the carriers,
but left for themselves the lucrative role of gatekeeper and market maker,
with nearly 30 percent margins!

**The hacker spirit isn't just about the ability to use, modify, and share
software, it's about equality**. The equality to run, modify, and share
software with the same rights as the _vendor reserves for themselves_. Locked
platforms and gatekeepers are an invasion of that hacker spirit. I don't think
it's appropriate to single out Apple's practices here or to lavish any praise
on them in light of their ability to interfere and demonstrated willingness to
use that ability.

   [1]: http://almerica.blogspot.com/2008/09/podcaster-rejeceted-because-it.html

   [2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rio_PMP300

   [3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_box_(phreaking)

   [4]: http://www.apple.com/hotnews/thoughtsonmusic/

   [5]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9tqIluIi3_U

   [6]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_Information_Device_Profile

